[Music]
five military intelligence
the military intelligence organization
of world war ii consisted of a variety
of field units ranging from groups
serving with combat commands to the
special staffs designed to assist allied
combined operations councils at the
highest levels of Armed Services
leadership the core or hub of this
complex of overseas intelligence
entities was the Military Intelligence
Division of the War Department General
Staff an agency which and the Twilight
Peace of 1938 consisted of 20 officers
and 48 civilians footnote US Army
Military Intelligence Division a history
of the Military Intelligence Division
7th of December 1941 - 2nd of September
1945 typescript 1946 page 3 copies of
this study bear the marking secret the
copy utilized in this study was
Declassified and supplied by the office
of the Secretary of Defense hereafter
referred to as M ID end footnote quote
when the United States entered the war
the Military Intelligence Division was
ill-prepared to perform the tasks which
were to be thrust upon it the war in
Europe and the increasingly critical
world situation had increased the number
of persons employed in the division and
had added a few new activities despite
the expansion there were real
deficiencies which indicate the
condition of the division at the end of
1941 there was no intelligence on enemy
air or ground order of battle there was
no detailed reference material on enemy
Army forces such as weapons insignia
fortifications and documents there was
no detailed topographic intelligence for
planning landing operations there were
insufficient facts but plenty of opinion
on which to base strategic estimates and
there were no trained personnel for
either strategic or combat intelligence
the production and planning of
intelligence was proceeding but on a
limited scale and to an insignificant
degree fortunately most of this material
could be obtained from our allies but it
no more than satisfied current
intelligence requirements and was
completely inadequate for long-range
requirements before VJ day the division
had developed into a large and efficient
intelligence organization but this
development like the building of Rome
did not take place overnight present
estimates indicate that an efficient
intelligence machine was not developed
until late 1944 end quote
appointed chief of the operations
division successor to the war plans
division of the War Department General
Staff in March 1942
Major General Dwight D Eisenhower the
man destined to command Operation Torch
and serve as supreme commander of the
European theater made the following
observation with regard to intelligence
operations and capabilities during the
period of America's entry into World War
quote within the War Department
a shocking deficiency that impeded all
constructive planning existed in the
field of intelligence the fault was
partly within and partly without the
army the American public has always
viewed with repugnance everything that
smacks of the spy during the years
between the two world wars no funds were
provided with which to establish the
basic requirement of an intelligence
system a far-flung organization of fact
finders our one feeble gesture in this
direction was the maintenance of
military attache x' and most foreign
capitals and since public funds were not
available to meet the unusual expenses
of this type of duty only officers with
independent means could normally be
detailed to these posts usually they
were estimable socially acceptable
gentlemen few knew the essentials of
intelligence work results were almost
completely negative and the situation
was not helped by the custom of making
long service as a military attache
rather than ability the essential
qualification for appointment as head of
the Intelligence Division in the War
Department the stepchild
position of g2 and our general staff
system was emphasized in many ways for
example the number of general officers
within the War Department was so limited
by peacetime law that one of the
principal divisions had to be headed by
a colonel almost without exception the
g2 division got the colonel this in
itself would not necessarily have been
serious since it would have been far
preferable to assign to the post a
highly qualified colonel than a mediocre
general but the practice clearly
indicated the Army's failure to
emphasize the intelligence function this
was reflected also in our schools where
despite some technical training and
battlefield reconnaissance and
intelligence the broader phases of the
work were almost completely ignored we
had few men capable of analyzing
intelligently such information as did
come to the notice of the War Department
and this applied particularly to what
has become the very core of intelligence
research and analysis namely industry in
the first winter of the war these
accumulated and glaring deficiencies
were serious handicaps initially the
intelligence division could not even
develop a clear plan for its own
organization nor could it classify the
type of information at deemed essential
and determining the purposes and
capabilities of our enemies the chief of
the division could do a little more than
come to the planning and operating
sections of the staff and in a rather
pitiful way ask if there was anything he
could do for us end quote
footnote Dwight D Eisenhower crusade in
Europe New York Doubleday & Company 1948
page 32 the chronology of organizational
developments in the military
intelligence structure necessarily
focuses upon the military intelligence
division beginning with the final months
before the Pearl Harbor attack in
September 1941 the Military Intelligence
Division was organized vertically and
prepared not only to produce
intelligence but also to expand and case
war came
the assistant chief of staff g2
Brigadier General Sherman miles was
chief of the division and was assisted
by an executive reporting directly to
him was the special study group later
the propaganda branch reporting to him
through the executive were the Chiefs of
the administrative Intelligence
counterintelligence plans and training
and censorship branches the
administrative branch included two types
of functions such sections as finance
personnel records and coordination
comprised the first type by this
consolidation of administrative
functions the remaining branches of the
division were free to devote their full
energies to their primary functions this
branch also was charged with the
administrative supervision of the
military anti a system the foreign
liaison and translation sections the
heart of the Military Intelligence
Division was in the intelligence branch
the largest of the branches organized
along Geographic lines it controlled in
a large measure all of the processes of
intelligence information was gathered
and evaluated and intelligence produced
by the following seven sections the
Balkans and Near East the British Empire
central Europe Eastern Europe Far East
Latin America and Western Europe it will
be noted that the lines of demarcation
were entirely geographical and that
there was no attempt to separate
information and intelligence topically
according to political economic
scientific and so on the air section and
later the order of battle branch or
exceptions to this rule intelligence was
disseminated by the dissemination
section and by the g2 situation section
which maintained the g2 situation-room
the information gathering activities of
military attache z' observers and others
working in the field were directed by
the field personnel section
this included directives concerning the
types of information desired but did not
embrace administrative matters which
were left to the militant
a section of the administrative branch
in other words the anti-phase looked to
the administrative branch for their
administration to the intelligence
branch for their directives and reported
their findings to the geographic
sections to assist the chief of the
intelligence branch in administrative
matters
there was a small administrative group
within the branch it will be noted that
the branch controlled all of the
processes of intelligence and that it
was devoted entirely to positive
intelligence as opposed to negative or
counterintelligence end quote
footnote M ID history pages 6 and 7 and
footnote organized functionally the
counterintelligence branch
composed of domestic intelligence
investigation and plant intelligence
sections probed subversion and
disloyalty matters supervised defense
plant security produced intelligence
relative to the domestic situation was
responsible for safeguarding military
information and took on such special
assignments as were given to it the plan
and training branch quote prepared plans
for intelligence requirements and
developed policies for military and
combat intelligence end quote while also
being quote responsible for the
development and supervision of training
doctrine in the fields of military and
combat intelligence and quote until the
United States actually entered the war
the censorship branch renamed the
information control branch on December
5th 1941 remained small and confined
itself to preparing plans for future
censorship because national censorship
in wartime was not assigned to the War
Department g2 was responsible only for
military censorship policy through
liaison with the office of censorship
which provided M ID with valuable
information uncovered by that agency
footnote the censorship of
communications between the United States
and foreign nations was authorized by
the first War Powers Act approved
December 18th 1941
pursuant to this statute
President Roosevelt on December 19th
established the office of censorship a
civilian agency located within the
National Defense program tangentially
attached to the executive office of the
president the director of the office of
censorship and its program was Byron
Preiss who headed the unit until its
demise by a presidential directive
issued September 28 1945 and effective
on November 15th of that year see Elmer
Davis and Byron Preiss War Information
and censorship Washington American
Council on public affairs 1943 also see
Byron Preiss governmental censorship in
wartime American political science
review the 36 october 1942 8 37 through
850 end footnote in early 1942
a reorganization occurred within the War
Department a restructuring which would
prove functionally troublesome for M ID
code the new organization was announced
to the Army in circular number 59 as it
affected the army its changes were
far-reaching and fundamental the most
striking feature of the proposed
reorganization was the distinction made
between operating and staff functions
the latter were to be retained by the
General Staff Division but the former
were to be placed in operating agencies
this entailed the separation of the
larger part of the organization of each
staff division from the small
policymaking group who performed truly
staff functions the policy groups would
remain in the General Staff as a small
policymaking and advisory staff divorced
from the operating functions of their
organizations by ruthlessly regrouping
many old offices and functions and
integrating them into the new
organization smoother functioning was
expected the language of the circular
did not make a clear distinction between
the old policymaking military
intelligence division and the newly
created operating military intelligence
service from the present point of
the intentions of the circular seemed
clear this distinction was not made
completely clear until circular 5-2
September 1944 was issued although some
progress had been made in the July 1942
revision of AR 10-15 circular number 59
charged the military intelligence
division g2 with those duties of the War
Department General Staff relating to the
collection evaluation and dissemination
of military information the military
intelligence service was established
under the direction of the assistant
chief of staff Military Intelligence
Division War Department General Staff to
operate and administer the service of
the collection compilation and
dissemination of military intelligence
here was a verbal paradox in the
vocabulary of g2 intelligence is based
upon the evaluation of information
information is the raw product from
which intelligence is produced the
military intelligence division was
charged then with duties relating to the
evaluation and dissemination of
information while the military
intelligence service was not charged
with the evaluation but with the
dissemination of intelligence and quote
footnote M ID history pages 12 and 13
and footnote subsequent discs
sessions and attention to this verbal
dilemma contributed to a clarification
of the functions of mi d and mis but the
initial confusion and lack of an
authoritative decision on the matter did
little to ameliorate ill feelings over
the dichotomous organization and
subsequent rivalry between the two units
quote a series of office memoranda
implemented the reorganization directed
by circular number 59 the military
intelligence service was created and all
personnel except certain commissioned
officers were transferred to it from the
Military Intelligence Division an
examination of the personnel assignments
in the memoranda and of assignments
listed on a chart of 15th of January
1942 reveals few essential changes
colonel haze a kroehner the new chief
military intelligence service had been
chief of the intelligence branch Colonel
Ralph C Smith the new executive officer
military intelligence service had been
executive officer and chief
administrative branch the latter
function was assigned to colonel te
Roderick formerly assistant executive he
likewise retained his assignment as
assistant executive officer the new
chief intelligence group Colonel RS
Bratton had formerly been assigned to
the Far East section of the intelligence
branch chief of the training branch
Lieutenant Colonel pH Timothy had been
chief of the plans and training branch
colonel Oscar Sol Bert now chief of the
psychological warfare branch was a past
member of that branch colonel black its
former chief had been transferred to the
Military Intelligence Division staff
section other members of the staff were
either newly assigned members of the
Military Intelligence Division detailed
from the AAF or members of the Military
Intelligence Division the Military
Intelligence Service was divided into
four groups each reporting to the chief
military intelligence service through
his executive the foreign liaison branch
and the military attache section were
ported independently to the chief
military intelligence service and not
through a deputy the administrative
group was divided into five housekeeping
sections the intelligence group was
divided into parallel air and ground
sections organized according to theaters
in addition an administrative branch and
a situation and planning branch assisted
in the supervision and planning for the
group the counterintelligence group was
divided into parallel air and ground
sections devoted to domestic plant
intelligence military censorship and
security of military information they
too were coordinated by an
administrative and a counterintelligence
situation and evaluation branch
psychological warfare training and
dissemination were assigned to the
Operations Group end quote
footnote another account comments that
after march 1942 there is a small
Military Intelligence Division of the
War Department General Staff totaling 16
officers with 10 clerical assistants and
a military intelligence service
consisting of 342 officers and 1005
civilian and enlisted assistants the
service was to carry out the operational
and administrative activities for the
General Staff section and while there
were to be two distinct agencies some of
the key officers were members of both
organizations this differentiation
tended to be an artificial distinction
and in practice there was but one
organization from Auto L Nelson Junior
National Security and the General Staff
Washington Infantry Journal press 1946
page 525 end footnote 3 months after
circular number 59 was implemented the
new assistant chief of staff g2 Major
General George V strong whom Eisenhower
described as a senior officer possessed
of a keen mind a driving energy and a
ruthless determination indicated his
dissatisfaction with the reorganization
as it affected mi D
and offered an alternate plan of
structure to the chief-of-staff quote it
was essentially the same organization as
before except that the office of chief
military intelligence service had been
established between most of the branches
and the g2 the Military Intelligence
Division staff aside from the military
intelligence service was new the most
apparent difference between the old and
new plan was the separation of ground
and air intelligence into parallel
sections within intelligence and
counterintelligence as before a group
was established which met in the
Situation Room to make the final
evaluation and to conduct broad planning
and policymaking preliminary work of
this sort was also done in the situation
and planning sections and the evaluation
section of the intelligence and
counterintelligence groups because the
final evaluation process was entrusted
to the g2 General Staff there was no
clear break between the military
intelligence division and the military
intelligence service general strong
believed in organizing the division
functionally and sought therefore to
place evaluation in the intelligence
group in July according to present
evidence the dissemination branch was
combined with certain other functions
and designated the evaluation and
dissemination branch probably in the
intelligence group the date is uncertain
but the g2 telephone directories for
June and July indicate that this must
have been the date it was an agency
which evaluated the overall information
collected within the group and
disseminated it as intelligence in
October its name was changed to the
dissemination group and it was placed in
the Intelligence Group at the same time
the intelligence group was divided into
the newly created North American and
foreign intelligence command and the
American intelligence command the two
commands gave the Military Intelligence
Service the means to handle on the one
hand all intelligence affecting Latin
America American intelligence command
and all other types of foreign
intelligence North American and
for an intelligence command on the other
end quote other changes in the
intelligence structure were affected
such as the decentralized of the
American intelligence command and
relocating it in Miami quote by 29th of
November 1942 arrangements were
sufficiently stable to issue a chart
showing the various changes the g2 staff
was retained and the chief military
intelligence service was also designated
as deputy g2 the Executive Office now
appeared to supervise the message center
the chief military intelligence service
was given four assistant Chiefs for
intelligence training administration and
security the intelligence group was
divided into the two commands mentioned
above North American and foreign
intelligence command was organized
geographically with a separate air
section further subdivided into general
Geographic sections American
intelligence command was organized more
functionally with branches devoted to
special activities American air control
communications control and hemisphere
studies the dissemination group was so
placed that it's cable collection
theater intelligence and publications
branches received reports from both
commands at the top of this pyramid was
the evaluation board which reported to
the assistant chief military
intelligence service intelligence and
could receive reports from the
aforementioned commands and groups the
training agency was divided into two
groups one for intelligence schools and
the other for liaison with other schools
and agencies concerned with intelligence
training
the assistant chief military
intelligence service administration was
given certain operational branches in
addition to his housekeeping branches
these included foreign liaison military
attache psychological warfare prisoner
of war and geographic branches the
latter was announced 25th of November
1942 as the coordinating and
policymaking agency for war depart
procurement preparation and reproduction
of maps
the assistant chief military
intelligence service security the old
counterintelligence group retained the
same essential organization being
divided into domestic intelligence
counterintelligence and safeguarding
military information or special not
shown on the chart was the special
branch which handled all matters
relating to cryptographic security and
communications interception and analysis
of cryptographic and coded messages and
measures relating to the use and
security of radar and signal
intelligence this branch reported
directly to the assistant chief of staff
g2 because the nature of its activities
prevented a wholesale circulation of its
efforts end quote the evaluation board
established on November 3rd 1942 in
accordance with general Strong's
particular wishes was directly
responsible to the assistant chief of
staff g2 and the chief of the military
intelligence service it maintained close
liaison with both the North American and
foreign intelligence command and the
American intelligence command in
addition foreign country experts were
added to its membership indicating
increasing importance for country
specialists quote general strong next
proceeded to announce a new organization
which more closely met his demands for
an Intelligence Division although he
disapproved of a separate military
intelligence service he retained it and
attempted to fashion his organization to
produce the desired effect the new
organization was announced 25th of
January 1943 the General Staff section
was divided into a policy section
charged with the study and review of
policies and their coordination in the
General Staff and War Department the
remainder of the staff was transferred
to the evaluation and dissemination
staff of the Intelligence Group the
staff was charged with evaluation
interpretation dissemination and
planning of intelligence specifically it
was charged with the
termination of the intelligence
requirements of the chief of staff and
operations division current intelligence
production and planning were therefore
taken out of the hands of the staff
where general strong apparently felt it
never should have been placed a policy
group was left behind to study and
coordinate policy matters no mention is
made of strategy and task force
operations but presumably these problems
were discussed by the evaluation and
dissemination staff the mission of the
staff had been stated even more fully on
8th of January 1943 when an interim
organization was announced it was to
control policy on evaluation supervise
its execution in the several levels of
the Intelligence Group and give final
and superior evaluation from the
operations viewpoint to military
information for the application of
intelligence locally and for its
dissemination wherever necessary
thus it not only set the policy for
evaluation but reviewed in its
supervisory capacity the products of the
various branches of the intelligence
group end quote the four major units of
the military intelligence service
administration Intelligence
counterintelligence and training
remained as they were but new
subdivision entities were created at the
discretion of the heads of these offices
the North American and foreign
intelligence command was abolished at
this time and the American intelligence
command became the American intelligence
service later the Latin American unit
quote further alterations in the
structure of the organization were
effected three months later the foreign
liaison and prisoner of war branches
were ordered to report directly to the
chief military intelligence service the
administrative group was abolished and
its sections transferred to the
executive a chart of functions and
personnel dated 17th of April 1943
reveals that the chief military
intelligence service was also deputy G
to four sections appear as part of the
War Department General Staff G
to the policy section the evaluation and
dissemination section the administrative
section and the Joint Intelligence
Committee section at the same time an
evaluation and dissemination staff is
included in the structure of the
Intelligence Group a study of its
functions and personnel reveals an
interesting situation as a part of the
g2 general staff the evaluation and
dissemination sections functions are
listed first as those assigned to the
evaluation and dissemination staff and
then as a section to study quote
physical economic political and
ethnology Coll geography in order to
advise on measures of national security
and assist in assuring continued peace
in the post-war world and conducted
studies of a broad nature to assist in
the prosecution of the war and quote its
other functions were to advise the chief
intelligence group on the intelligence
requirements of the military
intelligence divisions customers and to
assign priority to their requests they
would also evaluate and synthesize
information and intelligence produced
and make sure that there was always
careful and complete consideration of
all information in the military
intelligence service finally they were
to review and give final evaluation of
intelligence before it was disseminated
and exercised general supervision over
military intelligence service
publications and reports now the first
function quoted above is exactly the
same except for slight changes in
verbage as the mission of the geo
political branch has stated in June 1942
nowhere else in the chart is there a
reference to the branch nor had there
ever been any mention of it on any chart
because of a desire to keep its
activities secret in February or March
the branch's title had been changed to
the less alarming analysis branch end
quote next came renewed efforts to
abolish the military intelligence
service and Central Intelligence
operations under a new organization
vote on 30th of August 1943 it was
announced that general Hays kroehner
then chief military intelligence service
would become deputy for administration
g2 Colonel Thomas J Betts was announced
as deputy for intelligence g2 no new
chief was announced for the military
intelligence service all of the old
agencies of the Military Intelligence
Division and the military intelligence
service were grouped under these two
deputies
this was done in recognition of the fact
that all g2 military intelligence
service activities regardless of
allocation are concerned fundamentally
with military intelligence and security
it was further provided that an
intelligence producing agency stripped
of all administrative and operational
functions should be established all
other functions were to be handled by
another agency thus two deputies were
established the one responsible for
administrative and other functions while
the other was responsible for
intelligence and quote a second stage of
the MIS abolition plan came on September
22nd 1943 in a memorandum announcing a
further reorganization around three
deputies one for administration one for
air and one for intelligence the first
of these remained with general kroehner
who was also given responsibility for
the operation of the services group the
training group and the historical branch
quote the mission of the deputy for
intelligence was defined in the same
terms as in the previous memorandum he
was to direct not only the policy and
strategy group and theater group but
also the collection group the
prisoner-of-war branch and the order of
battle branch thus the function of
collection was returned to the deputy
for intelligence the deputy for error
was made responsible for the
re-established air unit which was
charged with the same liaison function
formerly assigned to the air liaison
section the deputy for air was also
charged with the supervision of Air
Corps personnel assigned to G
- and who were to be integrated into the
various sections of the theatre group
their functions were not elaborated but
they presumably remained the same as
before the new organization was not in
point of fact so new as it appeared to
be the memorandum had merely recalled
the earlier one by general strong
protesting the creation of Mis and then
accomplished the same purpose the
primary difference was the return of the
collection function to the Intelligence
Group it represents general Strong's
ideal organization of an intelligence
agency he believed the separation of the
military intelligence service from the
military intelligence division had been
unfortunate therefore it was abolished
he believed the organization should rest
on functional basis therefore
intelligence planning and policy
screening and evaluation and
dissemination were brought together
under one roof the many miscellaneous
functions of g2 services training
mapping history etc were left outside
the key organization in a sense the
military intelligence service had become
the organisation of the deputy for
intelligence except that policy and
planning was not left in the
intelligence producing agency
paradoxically the organization charts of
the War Department and the army
continued to show a separate military
intelligence service although it had
been abolished the bulk of the personnel
allotted to the Military Intelligence
Division were allotted to a military
intelligence service many papers
prepared in g2 continued to carry
signatures indicating that the military
intelligence service existed and
functioned this situation was deliberate
the reorganization memorandum stressed
the fact that its details were to be
retained in the Military Intelligence
Division outside the division an effort
was made to maintain the appearance of a
separate military intelligence service
end quote
when General Strong's tenure
jeetu came to an end and on February 7th
1944 he was replaced by major-general
Clayton Bissell the reinstatement of M
is in accordance with the chief of
staff's original wishes was assured
quote the preliminary study for another
reorganization was already in progress
three days after general strong was
relieved as assistant chief of staff G
to the adjutant general issued a letter
order establishing two boards of
officers to study recommend and
supervise the reorganization of the
Military Intelligence Division the first
board consisted of Brigadier General
Eliot D Cook the steering member Colonel
John H Stutzman Lieutenant Colonel
Francis H Brigham junior captain Jerome
Hubbard and mr. George schwartzwalder
Bureau of the budget this board was
directed to make a detailed study and to
submit recommendations for the
reorganization of the Military
Intelligence Division they were further
ordered to supervise the implementation
of these recommendations under the
supervision of a second board
it consisted of John J McCloy Assistant
Secretary of War Major General John P
Smith
Major General Clayton L Bissell and
Brigadier General Otto L Nelson jr. they
were directed to consider approve and
supervise the implementation of the
recommendations submitted by the cook
committee end quote
the work of these two panels came to a
conclusion within two months from their
creation quote on 23rd March 1944 mr.
McCloy reported to the chief of staff
the proposals of his committee based
upon the study of the cook committee a
revision of AR 10-15 was suggested which
would give to the Military Intelligence
Service the responsibility of securing
pertinent information and converting it
into intelligence for the use of the
chief of staff the General Staff and the
Military Intelligence Service the policy
staff would state and carry out all
policies concerning intelligence and
intelligence within the army the g2 was
responsible for the interior security of
the army and the production of
intelligence necessary for the operation
of the War Department the purpose of the
proposed change was clear
it not only separated the military
intelligence service from the policy
staff and delineated the
responsibilities of each but it also
clarified the relationship between the
division and the service this
recommended revision was not adopted
McCloy next outlined the proposed
reorganization of g2 it emphasized the
fact that the policy staff must not be
merged or integrated with the military
intelligence service the work of the
policy staff was divided into four
groups of related subjects a later
regrouping and rephrasing of these
subjects integrated and reduced the
number of functions the aim of both
allocations was to enable a small body
of experts to prepare policies each in
his particular specialty the broad
outlines of the military intelligence
service were likewise sketched but it
was emphasized that within the
organization rigid compartmentalization
would be avoided the chief military
intelligence service was charged with
two responsibilities the collection of
information from all sources and the
production of intelligence the director
of information was to discharge the
first function assisted by a supervisor
of information gathering personnel
liaison groups etc and a supervisor for
receiving classifying and distributing
information the director of intelligence
would be assisted by an editorial group
intelligence specialists and a chief of
research finally an executive for
administration was to be created to
relieve the chief military intelligence
service and his two directors of
administrative problems he was not to be
a channel of communication between the
directors and the chief of the military
intelligence service end quote
ultimately there
the implementation of the proposals of
the cook mccloy panels quote the
reorganisation committee had recommended
that AR 10-15 be revised so that the
distinctions between the military
intelligence division and the military
intelligence service would be properly
stated and made clear for all this
recommendation was not accepted in
September however a general staff
circular 5-2 27th of September 1944 was
issued which superseded the regulation
and achieved the desired end it
carefully listed the responsibilities
and functions of the Military
Intelligence Division and its
subdivisions the responsibilities of the
assistant chief of staff g2 was defined
as the preparation of plans and policies
concerning military intelligence and
counterintelligence the functions of the
division were listed and it was made
plain that it was to formulate plans and
policies and to supervise the execution
of the eleven functions listed the
circular was prepared by the policy
staff and there was therefore no
confusion of language between
information and intelligence one factor
however was added which had not been
made explicit before this was the
supervisory responsibilities of the
division the list of functions is clear
and speaks for itself
it is therefore quoted in full quote the
Military Intelligence Division
formulates plans and policies and
supervises one collection of information
and intelligence at home and abroad to
include interrogation of prisoners of
war to evaluation and interpretation of
information and intelligence 3
dissemination of intelligence for
terrain intelligence including
coordination of producing agencies 5
intelligence and counterintelligence
training 6 military liaison with
representatives of foreign governments 7
safeguarding military information to
include censorship and communications
thirty-eight counterintelligence
measures to include evasion and escape
nine army participation in propaganda
and psychological warfare ten army
historical activities and eleven the
military intelligence service which is
charged with appropriate operational
functions concerning matters within the
purview of the military intelligence
division end quote
for the first time then the distinction
between the military intelligence
division and the military intelligence
service was clearly stated it made a
fact of the efforts of the last few
years to make the Military Intelligence
Service the operational agency and the
Military Intelligence Division the
policy and planning agency the normal
staff duty of supervision was assigned
to the Military Intelligence Division no
less important was the fact that the
circular provided the division with an
up-to-date statement of its mission
responsibilities and functions in effect
it was the statement of functions
described in the report of the
reorganization committee before leaving
the evolution of the Military
Intelligence Division brief attention
should be given to its operational units
and their general activities the first
consideration in this regard is the
intelligence collection function quote
as of 7th of December 1941 the
collection of intelligence information
was the responsibility of the
intelligence branch of the military
intelligence division this branch also
evaluated and distributed intelligence
information maintained digests of
information of foreign countries
prepared combat political and economic
estimates and prepared special Studies
on foreign countries its geographical
subsections directed and coordinated the
collection of information by military
attache x' by means of index guide and
direct communication the index guide was
a broad general outline covering the
various aspects of information to be
reported on a foreign country it was too
general to be considered
an intelligence directive from which
timely intelligence information can be
expected specific direction to the
military anti-phase in regard to
collecting intelligence information was
spasmodic and therefore incomplete the
geographic sections tended to depend on
the unguent II and clairvoyance of the
military attache to forward desired
information the first step towards
centralization came in March 1942 when a
collection section was established in
the situation and planning branch of the
Intelligence Group although the primary
function of collecting information
remained with the geographic and
subsections of the Intelligence Group
the collection section maintained
liaison with other government agencies
to secure information it was essentially
a liaison section until in November when
the collection branch was placed in the
dissemination group its new directive
made it the agency to receive and
requisition all information except
routine emanating from the field
services it obtained special information
for the geographic branches and other
divisions of the military intelligence
service and from time to time it issued
such intelligence directives as the
chief of the intelligence group might
direct the emphasis here was on non
routine reports routine reports were
still the responsibility of the
geographic branches in securing its
information the branch used personal
interviews maintained contact with
governmental and civilian agencies and
contacted field representatives end
quote field intelligence was gathered
for battle commanders and strategists
with a view to its immediate use by them
and then subsequent forwarding to the
military intelligence division footnote
on the collection of field intelligence
for immediate combat purposes see Robert
hourglass and Philip P Davidson
intelligence is for commanders
Harrisburg military service publishing
company 1948 also see
Oscar w Koch with Robert G Hayes g2
intelligence for patent Philadelphia
Whitmore publishing company 1971 and
footnote the intelligence needs of the
general staff in Washington were
dictated by global strategy commanders
closer to specific operations required
detailed intelligence of a more
particular istic type in many ways
mid-2nd nin firm ation which would serve
both levels of intelligence need quote
the functions of the collection branch
were redefined 29th of January 1943 by
the chief Intelligence Group after the
reorganization outlined in memorandum
number 18 the branch was designated as
the agency to requisition receive and
allocate all material coming into the
Intelligence Group nevertheless the
individual units of the group could
still correspond with the military
intelligence service field
representatives in the area of the
special interest but henceforth were
required to keep the chief of the
collection branch informed of this
correspondence a system of weekly
reports to the collection branch were
inaugurated which itemized the types of
information desired assigned a priority
rating and distinguished new from old or
repeated requests these reports helped
the branch coordinate collection
activities with the requirements of
other agencies it did not yet have
complete control over the collection of
information but if we're seizure by
which a large portion of the requests
were cleared through the branch was
established the responsibility for
liaison and the development of new
sources increased the degree of its
control over the collection of
information on 18th of March 1943 the
foreign branch actually the field
services branch at this period was
transferred to the collection branch by
this transfer the collection unit gained
administrative control of the military
attache system on 2nd of April 1943 the
organization of the unit
is described and it's functions
redefined no new functions were added
except those acquired through the
incorporation of the foreign liaison
branch but the overall statement of
responsibilities designated the unit as
the agency to requisition receive and
allocate all material coming into the
Intelligence Group the regional branches
were still authorized to communicate
directly with our representatives abroad
end quote next came the reorganization
of 1944 and its effects upon the
collection of intelligence information
quote the reorganization plan of the
McCloy committee recognized the
importance of the collection of
information to the production of
intelligence an agency separate from the
research branches was created to exploit
all possible sources and to collect
timely useful information the production
of information the raw material of
intelligence was placed under the
director of information and more
specifically in the source control unit
the supervisor of source control
processed trained and assigned
information gathering personnel it
advised them of the types of information
required it assured the timely receipt
of useful information it weeded out
useless information and developed new
sources as established it was largely an
administrative and supervisory office
but it soon acquired other functions in
October 1944 a War Department
intelligence collection committee was
established under the supervisor of
source control it was formed to
coordinate and integrate all War
Department intelligence target
objectives for the exploitation in
Germany and other rehabilitated areas
formerly occupied by the axis the
committee coordinated and compiled the
requirements of the research branches of
the military intelligence service the
Technical Services and the Air Forces in
to target objective folders the folders
were sent overseas to the combined
intelligence objectives subcommittee
which
coordinated all Allied intelligence
requirements so as to prevent
duplication of investigation and to
promote the most efficient use of
specialist personnel the committee also
sent out investigative teams from the
United States to exploit intelligence
targets in November 1944 the committee
began to turn its attention to
objectives in Japan and Japanese
occupied territory the first of these
folders was dispatched in May 1945 the
formal charter of the committee was not
issued until June 9th 1945 but it had
already been in operation for some time
before this its Secretariat was created
September 23rd 1944 to do the actual
writing and coordinating of intelligence
requests the Secretariat worked under
the supervision of the supervisor of
source control who had been performing
this work reports from the theatres were
received in the reading panel which
determined the reproduction and
distribution to be given all incoming
material the Secretariat filed new
information in the target objective
folders as received documents a basic
army interest were sent to the Pacific
military intelligence research section
Camp Ritchie Maryland and those of basic
Navy interest were sent to the Navy
document center both agencies maintained
accession lists of documents received
and quote this committee marked an
important pinnacle and centralized
coordination of intelligence information
collection to further facilitate this
organizational system a monitoring
control procedure for processing
information requests was created this
practice allowed the supervisor of
source control to assign requests to the
appropriate unit responsible for
developing the type of information
desired to supervise response time and
quality and to otherwise remain apprised
of the status of such inquiries the
source control unit continued to issue
general directives as well regarding the
collection of information thereby
setting priorities
and establishing a degree of quality
control as well
end quote another important entity
within M ID was the military attache
structure quote the group which
administered this system during the war
changed its name from time to time it
was known as the military attache
section and branch until April 17 1943
and thereafter as the foreign branch the
function and mission of the organization
remained about the same throughout the
period the relation of the branch to the
military attache system was purely
administrative it processed personnel
assigned to these offices it brought
them to the Military Intelligence
Division where passports were arranged
inoculations procured and intelligence
indoctrination was completed
thereafter the branch handled all
administrative correspondence between
them and the War Department and
supervised the administration of their
offices finally it was responsible for
assisting the collection of intelligence
by transmitting specific requests and
general directives such as the index
guide in December of 1941 the section
was composed of six officers and nine
civilians under the direction of Captain
later colonel WM Adams in the field
there were 52 offices staffed by 129
officers coincident with the
reorganization of the War Department
March 9th 1942 an air section made up of
an increment of officers from the
foreign liaison section a 2 was added to
administer the air attache system in
early 1942 there were 12 assistant
military attache z' for air each with an
airplane and a crew chief by December
1st 1945 this number had grown to
include 48 military air anti-phase and
assistance in 38 military attache
offices abroad and quote another
mechanism developed for coordinated
intelligence collection was the joint
intelligence collection agencies quote
after the Noor
African invasion it was found that in
areas where a theater commander was
actually present the flow of
intelligence stopped the theater
intelligence organizations were
interested in combat intelligence rather
than intelligence and information
necessary for training and strategic
planning the solution was the formation
of the joint intelligence collection
agency in North Africa Algiers by an
agreement with General Eisenhower dated
January 26 1943 this agency was expanded
on May 30th 1943 to include not just
Algiers but all of North Africa and
became known as the joint intelligence
collection agency North Africa a second
joint intelligence collection agency was
established as joint intelligence
collection agency Middle East for the
Middle East theatres April 23rd 1943 on
August 5th 1943 the system was placed on
a worldwide basis by a direction of the
joint deputy Chiefs of Staff the third
was established in the china burma india
theatre august 19 1943 and from this a
separate one was established for China
April 27 1945 when that theater was
established the Pacific Ocean area was
served by the joint intelligence
collection Pacific Ocean area which was
operated under the direction of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff end quote
footnote for a view of coordinated
intelligence operations within general
Eisenhower's supreme headquarters in
London see kenneth strong intelligence
at the top new york Doubleday and
company
1969 pages 72 through 299 and footnote
in addition to supplying administrative
support and guidance for the joint
intelligence collection agencies the
foreign branch of the MIT collection
unit also supervised two special
missions organized in the summer of 1943
the first of these entities gathered all
information available regarding the
latest developments and capabilities of
the enemy in the field of
bacteriological warfare the
second called the al SOS mission was
operational by the autumn it sought
scientists and scientific information
which might reveal the progress of the
enemy in atomic research and allied
subjects as of June 1944 liaison between
MIG and other federal agencies was
centralized in a Washington liaison
branch but even after that time informal
liaison persisted beyond the new units
control quote the roots of the branch
are to be found in the contact section
existing in the intelligence branch on
December 5th 1941 it was charged with
contacting State Office of Naval
Intelligence etc for military
information subsequent charts and
reorganization memoranda do not mention
it but a chart of May 15 1942 lists one
of the functions in the dissemination
branch as interviewing returning
observers a task later assigned to the
Washington liaison branch mention of a
contact and liaison section is made
October 23rd 1942 in a discussion of
intelligence possibilities in the
interviews of returning observers
officers and civilians by major Edward F
Smith in October and November 1942 as we
have seen in the discussion of the
collection branch this function was
included in the directive of December
9th 1942 nevertheless there seems to
have been at least three agencies doing
this type of work independently and
without coordination War Department
liaison State Department liaison and
domestic branch all in the collection
unit in February 1944 there were 150
liaison functions performed in military
intelligence division but they were not
coordinated or controlled many offices
whose functions were normally liaison
acted independently of their superiors
and on their own initiative as colonel
HH mole chief of the north american
branch said there were too many people
running too many contacts
successful work end quote while the
coordination of liaison was a persistent
and continuous problem in Washington for
MI D it was less so in field contacts
with private business enterprises deal
largely to the good efforts of regional
offices quote at one time there were
four such offices in New York San
Francisco Miami and New Orleans they
were established to collect information
of intelligence value to the War
Department from sources peculiar to
their location in addition they
performed such functions as liaison with
foreign personnel dictated by the
characteristics of the industries and
traffic of their locations only the
Miami office survived the war all of the
rest having been closed before the end
of hostilities the branch offices
originated in 1940 at that time most of
the information coming into the division
came in the form of military anti Shea
reports it was recognized that there was
a considerable amount of information to
be had in the principal ports of entry
and in the metropolitan centers of the
nation files of trade data insurance
maps and related data records of
financial transactions Engineering
reports travel diaries and field notes
of scientists and other similar items
existed in these centers this material
could not be shipped to Washington for
processing so that it was necessary to
go to the sources end quote the first
such field office to be established by
mid-1 July 8 1940 he can --scent rated
on Latin American intelligence but by
August 1941 the product had shifted to
target folders on Europe and
subsequently on Japan before being
closed on December 31st 1944 a satellite
of the New York office was opened in
Chicago sometime between January and
March of 1943 a New Orleans unit
operated between April 17 1941 and
February 2nd 1943 the San Francisco
office was inaugurated on July 31st
nineteen
31 and initially devoted its attention
to interviewing evacuees from the
Asiatic and Pacific areas of conflict
later the intelligence interest of the
unit shifted to business and educational
sources familiar with the Orient while
in operation the office cooperated
closely with representatives of the
Office of Naval Intelligence it ceased
functioning on June 30th 1944 the Miami
office was the longest-lived and last to
open commencing operations on April 7
1942 its principal focus was upon Latin
and South American developments and the
trafficking of foreign visitors to the
United States the the Miami gateway
quote the foreign liaison office was
created 31st of August 1941 to
facilitate the work of foreign military
anti-phase and other foreign officers in
this country on official business it
made arrangements to see that proper
courtesies were extended to them and
systematized and controlled the military
information furnished them at the
beginning of the war it was a part of
the administrative branch in March of
1942 it was directly under the executive
military intelligence service but later
was placed under the g2 in March and it
consisted of 12 officers and 24
civilians but the same month received an
increment of personnel from the foreign
liaison section of the air staff after
the reorganization of June 1944 it was
placed in the Washington liaison branch
where it remained for the rest of the
war throughout the war then it was
concerned with the problem of satisfying
the needs of the diplomatic military
representatives of foreign governments
the basic directives and decisions which
related to the release and exchange of
both technical and military information
were made outside of the section the
results of these decisions flowed
through it the policies adopted in
regard to the exchange of information
and intelligence with the British and
our other allies were developed on a
higher level than the Military
Intelligence Division but it took part
the discussions once the general policy
was adopted there then remained the task
of implementing it and working out the
details on the working levels in general
this was done not in broad general
agreements but in a series of specific
arrangements
sometimes verbal and informal the
background of these agreements lies in
the pre-war period when the military
staffs of the two nations met to discuss
plans for strategy and to prepare for
eventualities beginning in January 1941
staff conversations were held to this
end throughout the American
representatives were careful not to
commit the nation to a line of action
which might later prove embarrassing
agreements were made and conversations
held not on the basis of when the United
States entered the war but if it should
be forced to enter it after 7th of
December 1941 further conversations and
meetings were held and more definite
agreements were made end quote
one of the devices developed to
facilitate cooperative intelligence
arrangements between the United States
and Great Britain was a special panel
called the combined intelligence
committee it was part of a progression
of intelligence coordinating units
created during the war first a joint
Army and Navy intelligence committee was
created under the joint army and navy
board on December 3rd 1941 organized in
1903 the Joint Board made
recommendations to the secretaries of
war and Navy on matters involving
cooperation of the two armed services
its subordinate agencies included the
joint planning committee established in
1919 the joint economy board established
in 1933 and the Intelligence Unit the
joint board was abolished in 1947 with
the institution of the Department of
Defense next came the Joint Intelligence
Committee organized under the Joint
Chiefs of Staff quote this committee
known also as jic was a continuation and
enlargement of the joy
board Committee of the same name which
had been authorized in 1941 it received
no charter from the Joint Chiefs of
Staff until May 1943 but it was given a
directive and was reorganized early in
March 1942 even before this On February
11th 1942 they combined Chiefs of Staff
paper had defined the duties and
membership of the Joint Intelligence
Committee its primary functions
throughout the War period were to
furnish intelligence in various forms to
other agencies of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff and to represent it on the
combined intelligence committee as
originally constituted the Joint
Intelligence Committee was composed of
the directors of the intelligence
services of the Army and Navy and
representatives of the State Department
the board of economic warfare later the
foreign economic administration and the
coordinator of information later the
director of Strategic Services the
Charter of May 1943 added the director
of the intelligence staff of the Army
Air Forces this membership remained
unchanged throughout the remainder of
the war the Joint Intelligence Committee
was assisted by a full-time subcommittee
and some ten or more special
subcommittees the permanent working
staff was organized by the committee
early in 1942 as the Joint Intelligence
subcommittee JIS see its status was
formalized in the charter of the
Committee on may 1943 two months later
the Joint Intelligence subcommittee was
renamed the Joint Intelligence staff J
is the latter agency was given a charter
by the Joint Chiefs of Staff in May 1944
and operated under it throughout the
remainder of the war end quote
footnote General Services Administration
National Archives and records service
the National Archives federal records of
world war ii military agencies volume ii
washington US government print off US
1951 page nine and footnote
then came the combined Intelligence
Committee quote provision for this
committee known also as CIC was made in
the agreement to create the combined
Chiefs of Staff but it does not appear
to have met before may 1942 it's working
subcommittee however known first as the
combined intelligence subcommittee CISC
and from August 1943 as the combined
intelligence staff CIS met as early as
February 19th 1942 this subcommittee was
composed of the Joint Intelligence
subcommittee later the Joint
Intelligence staff and the British Joint
Intelligence Committee in Washington the
combined intelligence committee
consisted of the Joint Intelligence
Committee and Representatives of the
British Joint Intelligence subcommittee
in London both the combined intelligence
committee and the combined intelligence
staff continued throughout the war the
former was responsible for collecting
and disseminating military intelligence
for the use of the combined Chiefs of
Staff and the combined staff planners
end quote other units of the Military
Intelligence Division with specialised
intelligence collection functions
included a prisoner interrogation group
quote the captured personnel and
material branch was originally known as
the prisoner of war branch it was not
established until 22nd of October 1942
although one of its functions the
interrogation center had been
established a few months earlier
thus the origins of the branch go back
almost to the beginning of the war the
original impetus for the establishment
of the interrogation centers came from
the Navy the Office of Naval
Intelligence had studied an
interrogation center near London during
the period from 25th of June to 17th of
December 1941 it found that such a
center where selected prisoners were
interrogated offered many advantages
over a system of interrogation which
stopped with the initial questionings at
the time of the capture the Navy and war
departments had agreed that the army
would be responsible for all captured
personnel and that the Navy would turn
them over to the army as soon as
possible after capture upon completion
of the study the Secretary of the Navy
recommended the idea to the Secretary of
War after study by the Military
Intelligence Division the plan was
agreed to it was agreed that two
interrogation centers would be
established one in the east near
Washington and the other in California
on 15th of May 1942 fort hunt Virginia
was selected as the East Coast Center
and construction was completed by the
end of July endquote
activated in April 1942 the fort hunt
interrogation center was allotted 68
officers and 61 enlisted men in
September of the following year these
personnel were reduced to 41 officers
and 61 enlisted men the West Coast
Center opened at the end of December
1942 was located at Byron hot spring but
had a mailing address of Tracy
California thereby causing it to be
geographically referred to by two
different names quote the interrogation
centers fort hunt and Tracy were subject
to a dual command they were under the
control of the provost marshal general
who designated the commanding officers
for the two camps these officers were
responsible for procurement of equipment
and overhead personnel upon requisition
from the core areas interrogation
personnel were supplied by the Military
Intelligence Division and the Office of
Naval Intelligence and their activities
coordinated by the senior interrogating
officer the camps were classified as
temporary detention centers within the
compound of the camps the area known as
the interrogation center was operated by
and was the responsibility of the chief
of the military intelligence service
this arrangement was not satisfactory g2
requested a unified control be
established as more efficient and
conducive to improved morale the request
was disap
proved as contrary to existing
regulations the adjutant general was
then asked to establish a new regulation
similar to that governing the harbor
defenses
this was accomplished on 14th of April
1943 when the post commanders of fort
hunt and byron and hot springs were
ordered reassigned this marked the end
of the dual control system and the
transfer of these operations to the
chief military intelligence service the
senior interrogating officer was
thereafter post commander end quote
the last of the intelligence collection
units of mi D was the map and
photographed branch which began as the
geographic section of the plans and
training branch in 1941 before
reorganization into a separate branch in
the spring of the next year subunits
included a photo section still picture
section in a me motion picture film
military technical photography
photographic division processing terrain
photo section military technical photo
unit indexing and filing and motion
picture unit there was of course closely
Azon with the army map service and army
pictorial service materials were also
drawn from the aeronautical chart
service Navy hydrographic office Coast
and geodetic survey US Geological Survey
office of Strategic Services and several
commercial firms including the National
Geographic Society quote generally
speaking the division followed a
traditionally geographic approach to the
problem of intelligence production there
were those who found that the functional
divisions of the mccloy committee were
sound in certain specialized subjects as
order of battle air and topographical
intelligence a functional grouping was
more desirable shortly after the war the
division again embraced the geographic
arrangement which would seem to settle
the matter at least for the moment but a
post-war opinion of wartime operations
states that the division was not
operating efficiently until the end of
by which time the geographical
arrangement had been abandoned and quote
whichever approach was operative in
intelligence production the core element
of the research sections was their
filing systems according to the basic
intelligence directive numbers and
subjects served to indicate the most
probable subdivisions into which
information might be placed quote
intelligence was produced by other means
than merely filing incoming reports
careful studies were made from minutia
collected from the files of business
concerns
thus a laborious study of the
organization and production techniques
used in the manufacture of an essential
item might point out those places or the
disruption of a simple process would
halt production with only a modest
expenditure of bombs
thus manufacturing processing and
transportation bottlenecks or sought as
targets captured orders were examined to
discover the formation of new types of
outfits for clues to future plans the
who's who files were especially useful
in turning up new and special type
organizations all available information
on the enemy was studied because
eventually it was grist for the mill end
quote under the geographic arrangement
the principal research units were
British Empire Western Europe Central
Europe Eastern Europe the Far East and
Latin America this 1941 structure gave
way the following year to the your
African Far Eastern and American
intelligence service groups the air unit
and Special Branch the last-named
being the largest intelligence producing
agency in mid-1944 reorganization saw
the establishment of the military
topographic political economic
sociological scientific and who's-who
branches but this scenario too was due
for alteration quote under the terms of
the reorganization of June 1944
political and economic intelligence was
to be
produced by two branches devoted to
these subjects and working on a
worldwide basis to this end they were
separated and personnel and equipment
were brought in from the geographic
branches and the special branch in
November the far eastern section of the
political branch was separated and
transferred to the economic branch and
the European functions of the economic
branch were transferred to the political
branch each became in fact a political
economic branch responsible for the
production of intelligence on these
matters according to a geographic area
the old political branch being
responsible for Europe Latin America and
North America and the economic branch
being responsible for the Far East and
quote the personalities of leaders and
organized groups opposed to the Allies
cause or of interest to the War
Department and this prompted the
collection of intelligence material
pertaining to such individuals quote
originally this information had been
filed in the records section by
relatively unskilled clerks who composed
and filed the cross-reference sheets
later this function was removed from the
records section and in January 1943
counterintelligence was removed from the
military intelligence division and
decentralized to the service commands
under the direction of the Army Service
forces it was necessary then to find a
substitute whereby central files could
be established for the recording of
biographical information needed in the
military intelligence division it should
also be borne in mind that the
information which was secured by the
counterintelligence group had been
concerned largely with subversive
personnel and thus left out a large
segment of the world's population who
did not fall automatically into this
category the geographical branches had
maintained files of persons of interest
to them in their particular area but
these files were of course decentralized
and suffered from the limitations of
decentralization
shifting from area to area could not
easily be followed then unless proper
inquiries were made between the
geographic branches in January 1943 the
Special Branch began a named file of
persons or persons of interest to it and
since it was not bound by geographical
limitations a nucleus of a central file
was established with trained personnel
to operate it end quote
in June 1944 the who's-who branch became
the recipient of name file of the
Special Branch and received as well the
relevant personality files of the
geographical branches quote an offshoot
of the geographic section of the plans
and training branch later map and photo
branch was the topographic branch which
was formed in June 1944 by separating
the map service photo intelligence and
interpretation reports sections from the
remainder to form the map and photo
branch that which remained became the
terrain previously the geographic
research section the cartographic
section and the transportation section
as a result it became more of a research
section the intelligence which it
produced was provided not only to the
War Department general staff but also to
such agencies as the Joint Intelligence
Committee the joint war plans committee
and the joint logistics plan committee
it produced intelligence concerning
terrain vegetation routes of movements
and drainage but also supplied
intelligence concerning landing beaches
climate and soil traffic ability which
was generally produced by other agencies
the chief of the branch represented the
Military Intelligence Division on the
Joint Intelligence Committee to obtain
topographic intelligence he also
represented the War Department General
Staff on the United States board on
geographical names the terrain section
procured selected evaluated and
integrated information concerning
terrain and climate it also prepared
written
ports and manuscript maps which
interpreted terrain and climate
intelligence the transportation section
was a new function or a specialization
which appeared after the reorganization
it was designed to handle the demand for
information and intelligence concerning
the classifications and locations of
rail networks and terminals roads trains
bridges and tunnels and the depths
widths and currents of navigable rivers
it also prepared manuscript maps as
directed of transportation networks by
VJ day this objective was only partially
satisfied the following sections of the
Far East were completed Burma China
proper Netherlands Indies Indochina
Malaya and Thailand with poor mosa Japan
Korea Manchuria and the Philippines
partially completed the cartographic
section produced maps and graphic
material required by the other sections
to present topographic intelligence in
its final form end quote
the scientific branch maintained liaison
with federal agencies in an effort to
keep abreast the latest developments in
American and Allied war research and
also sought to produce intelligence
regarding enemy progress and such
diverse subjects as radar and related
electronic matters rocketry jet
propulsion atomic energy production and
conventional weapons improvements its
subunits consisted of a chemical and
biological warfare section electronics
section new weapons section and
subsequently a physics section quote the
sociological branch was a new agency in
the military intelligence service but
its work had been foreshadowed in the
activities of other branches under the
new functional organization most of
these dispersed activities were combined
and enlarged and coordinated effort
provided the geographic branches had
done some of the work which the new
branch would perform
and as well as the propaganda branch
which had attempted some surveys of
morale and propaganda which duplicated
the later work of the branch the
geopolitical branch had undertaken some
population studies during its brief
existence and these were now taken over
by the sociological branch the main
effort of the branch was directed toward
the discovery of sociological trends of
military importance population and
manpower data was studied for clues to
vital statistics as well as the
migrations and occupational
characteristics of groups and types
manpower and labour problems were
studied to discover the availability of
manpower for military and industrial
service and the effect of legislation
and organizations on the availability of
manpower both civilian and military
morale was studied in enemy countries
social groups and classes were studied
to discover how their cleavages and
tensions might be used to serve military
ends and quote organized in June 1944
the military branch produced
intelligence on all aspects of foreign
ground and air forces with an emphasis
upon order of battle data but included
as well
weapons fortifications air industry and
some translation activities assigned to
the unit the functions of the branch
were not new but had appeared during the
war and had suffered ineffective
execution due to dispersed
administration and treatment quote at
the top of the pyramid of intelligence
production personnel or the specialists
while the rest of the division was
organized functionally in 1944 the
specialists were organized
geographically in theory they drew upon
the resources of the other branches for
the types of information which they
required to the materiel received from
the research sections they gave the
final evaluation and approval before it
was disseminated thus inheriting some of
the functions of the evaluation staff
by means of the g20 furan s-- they
presented the latest information from
all corners of the world with their
evaluation of its meaning and importance
thereafter during the day they sent him
such other reports as were required they
worked with the director of intelligence
and assisted him in giving directives to
the supervisor of source control to
gather information which they required
and gave direction and supervision to
the research sections for the same
purpose end quote
this then generally describes the midn
telogen spre duction organization but
once intelligence information had been
collected analyzed and a product was
produced one general function remained
to be served
dissemination quote throughout the war
there were efforts to centralize the
dissemination of intelligence prior to
1940 for the dissemination unit had
achieved the greatest degree of
centralization so far attained at no
time however did it or the reports unit
establish complete control of all phases
of this activity
indeed this would have been impossible
dissemination included not only the
preparation of printed periodical
publications of intelligence but also
the means by which intelligence was
presented to the G to the chief of staff
and the various staff divisions
intelligence was disseminated by
periodic publications special reports
conferences and so on besides the usual
types of reports and memoranda maps
photographs charts and tables were used
to present the material at hand the
normal dissemination functions were the
responsibility of the dissemination unit
in early 1944 its antecedents include
the dissemination section of the
intelligence branch which became the
dissemination branch in April 1942
meanwhile the situation branch created
early in 1942 was performing
dissemination functions in August 1942
the evaluation and dissemination branch
was created
to include the work of the dissemination
and situation branches in the
dissemination section along with other
sections devoted to communications
theater intelligence and order of battle
a project and review board reviewed all
completed projects before they were sent
out in November 1942 the designation of
these sections was changed to
dissemination group under Colonel G s
Smith it included cable branch
collection branch theater intelligence
branch and publications branch in April
1943 after a number of minor changes the
dissemination unit was created to be
responsible for the format and
appearance of any publication produced
in the military intelligence service
it also disseminated intelligence
approved by the evaluation and
dissemination staff this last group had
been established as the final evaluation
and review authority for intelligence
before it was disseminated to the Army
it passed on periodical items monographs
studies and similar reports end quote
this was the pattern of reorganization
and growth in the military intelligence
establishment during World War two quote
in 1941 g2 was a small organization
under the impact of wartime expansion
and development it grew in 1942 a new
factor entered the picture in the form
of a separate operating agency and
during the next two years an effort was
made to mold the organization into a
single intelligence producing and
policymaking agency in the course of
these efforts the Military Intelligence
Service tended to lose its identity in
1944 it re-emerged as an intelligence
operating and producing agency with
definite functions and responsibilities
at the same time there was a struggle
over the best method of organizing to
produce intelligence
thus evaluation was for a time turned
over to a board which had as an
additional function policymaking and
1944 a new method was devised by which
intelligence was produced by supervised
despecialized by the research groups all
of the policy-making activities were
allocated to the Military Intelligence
Division but one fact must be borne in
mind this method was more easily devised
in 1944 than at any previous time
because by then the Military
Intelligence Division had lost its
counterintelligence functions
prior to that the structure of the
organization had included a provision
for counterintelligence with the loss of
this function it was possible to greatly
simplify the organization and emphasized
the importance of teamwork in the new
Military Intelligence Division end quote
while there was a War Department
reorganization effective June 11th 1946
the Intelligence Division g2 did much
the same work as always as with the
other armed services the next great
revision of military intelligence
functions and organization would occur
in 1947 with the establishment of the
Department of Defense the National
Security Council and the Central
Intelligence Agency two other
outstanding units within the military
intelligence network should be examined
at this juncture the signal cores
cryptology group and the Allied
intelligence bureau the great importance
of the former of these entities derived
of course from the successful
decipherment of the Japanese code quote
a trickle of magic in 1936 had become a
stream in 1940 credit for this belongs
largely to Major General Joseph OMA
Bourne who became chief signal officer
in October 1937 ma Bourne had long been
interested in cryptology in 1914 as a
young first lieutenant he achieved the
first recorded solution of a cipher
known as the play fair then used by the
British as their field cipher he
described his technique in a 19 page
pamphlet that was the first publication
on cryptology issued by
United States government in World War
one he put together several
cryptographic elements to create the
only theoretically unbreakable cipher
and promoted the first automatic cipher
machine with which the unbreakable
cipher was associated when he became
head of the Signal Corps he immediately
set about augmenting the important
cryptanalytic activities he established
the SIS signal intelligence service as
an independent division reporting
directly to him enlarged its functions
set up branches started correspondence
courses added intercept facilities
increased its budget and put on more men
in 1939 when war broke out in Europe sis
was the first agency in the War
Department to receive more funds
personnel and space perhaps most
important of all Moll borns intense
interest inspired his men to outstanding
accomplishments more and more codes were
broken and as the international
situation stimulated an increasing flow
of intercepts the magic intelligence
approached flood stage and quote
footnote David Kahn the code breakers
New York new American Library 1973
originally published 1967 page 7 and
footnote when ma born retired in
September 1941 being succeeded by Major
General Dawson Olmsted the cryptanalytic
capability he had nurtured was
commendable but of course in need of
expansion and further refinement when
war engulfed the nation two months later
quote it multiplied its communications
intelligence manpower 30 fold from its
strengths December 7th 1941 of 331 44
officers and 137 enlisted men and
civilians in Washington and 150 officers
and men in the field ever-growing
requirements quickly dwarfed early
estimates such as the early one in 1942
that
staff of 460 would suffice and kept up a
relentless pressure for more and still
more workers yet the agency faced stiff
competition for them in manpower short
Washington
moreover the necessity for employees to
be of unquestionable loyalty and
trustworthiness because of the sensitive
nature of cryptanalytic results and the
importance of their being
temperamentally suited to the highly
specialized nature of the work greatly
reduced the number of prospects to fill
its needs the agency launched a series
of vigorous but discreet recruiting
drives it snatched people out of its
school even though they were only
partially trained during the school's
entire time at Fort Monmouth New Jersey
not one student completed the full 48
week course it brought in members of the
Women's Army Corps almost 1500 of them
these measures enabled the agency to
grow to a strength of ten thousand six
hundred and nine at its peak on January
1st 1945 5565 civilians 4,400 28
enlisted men and wax and 796 officers
this figure excludes Cryptologic
personnel serving under theater
commanders overseas nevertheless the
personnel supply never caught up to the
demand in April 1944 for example the
agency had more than 1,000 civilian
positions empty end quote
personnel growth new functions and the
pressures of war also dictated new
structure of the cryptological unit
quote in June of 1940 - Owen - a
reorganization of the office of the
chief signal officer the outfit shed its
old name of signal intelligence service
and gained and lost three new ones
within two months then from July 1942 to
July in 1943 it was called the signal
security service and from July 1943 to
the end of the war the signal security
agency
lieutenant colonel Rex Minkler chief
since before Pearl Harbor was replaced
in April 1942 by Lieutenant Colonel
Frank W Bullock in February 1943
Lieutenant Colonel W Preston read
quarterman tall husky quiet Pleasant who
had studied and then taught in the SIS
school in the 1936 became chief he
remained in the post to the end of the
war rising to a brigadier general in
June 1945 its population explosion and
its voluminous output strained its
administrative structure and this was
realigned several times as of Pearl
Harbor it was divided into four sections
the a or administrative the B or
cryptanalytic the sea or cryptographic
and the D or laboratory
end quote while the B section broke
ciphers and decoded messages the c
section devised new codes ciphers and
related materials for the American
military forces in August of 1942 an e
or communications section was created by
upgrading the traffic subsection of the
cryptanalytic unit in march 1943 the six
sections were elevated to branch status
and by the following year a machine
branch mechanised coding decoding
operations and an information and
liaison branch or added
in June of 1942 the Navy seated all
supervision and responsibility for
Japanese diplomatic code solutions to
the army surrendering both files and
machinery at this time in addition to
its central coding decoding operations
in Washington the signal intelligence
service established cryptanalytic units
in various theatres of the war received
tactical combat level communications
intelligence via the Signal Corps radio
intelligence companies in the field and
maintained an active radio intercept
program through the second signal
service battalion later the 94 xx
Technical Service Unit quote though this
setup held until the war ended
operational control of the agency passed
on December 15 1944 to g2 the military
intelligence section of the War
Department General Staff which was the
agency's major customer and which as
such for many months had indirectly
guided its activities the Signal Corps
merely retained administrative control
this confusing arrangement complicated
further by the agencies having both
staff and command functions ended in
August 1945 when the War Department
transferred all signal intelligence
units to agency control on September 6th
four days after the war ended the War
Department ordered the creation within
g2 of a new Cryptologic organization by
merging the signal security agency the
field cryptanalytic units and Signal
Corps cryptology this was the army
security agency which came into
existence September 15 1945 end quote
the Allied intelligence bureau composed
of combined Allied forces in the Pacific
Command zone of General Douglas
MacArthur was established at Brisbane
Australia on July 6th 1942 under the
auspices of his intelligence staff
headed by Major General Charles a
willoughby according to MacArthur's
records which Willoughby has cited quote
the history of the AIB is a secret
little publicized but highly important
chapter in the story of the southwest
Pacific from the Solomons to Borneo from
Java to the Philippines a small
adventurous group of carefully trained
specialists spread a network of
observers and operatives behind the
enemy lines well in advance of our main
body operating an almost total isolation
and normally without hope of outside
support every expedition was carried out
in the face of great personal risk if
discovered by the enemy the small
parties were doomed to almost certain
capture and probable death in that event
those who died quickly were fortunate
jungle wise coast watchers with tiny
radio transmitter receiver outfits
remained behind as the Japanese invasion
wave swept forward from these few
fearless men a powerful network of sea
air and ground spotters was developed
until finally it became impossible for
the enemy to make a single major move on
the surface or in the sky without
intelligence reports being flashed in
advance to Allied forces at the
conclusion of the desperate Guadalcanal
campaign Admiral Halsey publicly stated
that it was probable that the Allies
could not have retained their hard-won
initiative on Guadalcanal Island had it
not been for the consistent advanced
radio warnings by AIB agents of
impending enemy air attacks and quote
footnote Charles a Willoughby and John
Chamberlain MacArthur 1941 through 1951
New York mcgraw-hill Book Company 1954
pages 145 and 146 and footnote the
bureau was headed by Colonel CJ Roberts
an Australian with lieutenant Allison
End an American as his deputy the
principal structural units included a
British Special Operations sabotage and
silent killing group
a British radio monitoring outfit the
Netherlands Indies forces intelligence
service an Australian propaganda group
and the Australian coast watchers
footnote Allison end Allied intelligence
bureau New York David McKay company
pages 10 and 11 in footnote MacArthur's
records comment quote it was found
necessary to adjust the organizational
structure on a geographic rather than a
purely functional basis primarily to
protect and reconcile political
sovereignties a very interesting figure
emerged in the often delicate
negotiations when mr. Vander Plaats a
former governor of Eastern Java related
to native princes and a top-flight
diplomat his persuasive formula was the
division of the vast southwest Pacific
along colonial lines preserving the
pre-war status quo Colonel van s Merle
Smith g2 deputy who had handled
million-dollar New York corporations
before the war was just the tough hombre
to cut his way through tropical
ambitions the Chiefs of the various AIB
sections were placed under an Australian
comptroller who in turn was responsible
to g2 headquarters an American deputy
Comptroller was inserted as the finance
officer thus we retained a double check
upon the bureau and its elusive
international components a coordinating
staff consisting of liaison officers
from each headquarters was named to
assist the organization running true to
form though ostensibly under a single
directorship each of the subsections
attempted to remain more or less
autonomous and continuous readjustments
were necessary during the lifetime of
the bureau in order to achieve
centralized control end quote
the total manpower in the service of the
AIB has been estimated at several
thousand individuals
more concrete statistics indicate 164
Bureau operatives lost their lives
during the war while the fate of 178
other agents remains a mystery
75 Bureau members were captured while a
precise date for the termination of the
AIB is not available it certainly had
ceased operations by VJ day this is our
hidden history
you